# 11: ChatGPT and Cheating
"Cheating" can mean many different things, and it's worth remembering that using ChatGPT in writing assignments does not necessarily have to be considered cheating – just like using spell-checking for essays or calculators for math tests. In some cases, it is considered cheating, in other not.

In this book, "cheating" refers to deliberately trying to deceive or mislead the teacher, and it is clear that ChatGPT makes it easier for students to cheat, especially when it comes to writing assignments outside the classroom. ChatGPT can create texts on almost anything that is taught in school, with a quality that can be perceived as being written by a human both in terms of content and style. How does one deal with a problem like that?

One way to try to prevent cheating using ChatGPT is to block the web service on the school network. This is a path that some schools have taken – it became world news that all schools in the state of New York chose that option. Another option is to try to identify which texts are created with ChatGPT (or other similar tools). A tool called GPTZero was launched at the beginning of 2023, to do just that. [Another was launched by OpenAI][1] themselves in late January. The tools checks, among other things, if the word sequence in a text is ”probable,” which in that case points to the text being written by an AI of the same type as ChatGPT – which chooses words based on how well the words and sequences match texts they were trained on. Experiments show that the accuracy in classification is far from impressive, and difficult to rely on.

I am convinced that resourceful students will find relatively simple ways to trick AI text detectors and bypass network blacklists: Currently, it might suffice to make slight edits to a ChatGPT text or to create a wifi hotspot with a phone. If a teacher needs written work from students and it is used as a grading basis, I therefore believe that the assignments need to be done in a monitored way – not at home. I also believe that there is reason to examine how assignments can be designed so that ChatGPT can be used as a tool in the work, instead of being classified as cheating. Other possible options include trying to reduce the incentives for students to cheat, but this is difficult if there is a lot of focus on grades.

Regardless of approach, there will be cases where teachers suspect that students have cheated. A natural but rather time-consuming way to handle such cases is to ask students to explain what they submitted. If the student can do so in a way that is convincing, it is a credible way to see that the student indeed has the knowledge of interest. If the student can’t do it in a convincing way, it is a credible way of concluding that the student *doesn’t* have the required knowledge. Whether the student cheated or not, and with which tools, becomes less interesting – the focus is shifted to what the student does or doesn’t know.

In some subjects, or parts of subjects, it is difficult to use that approach. And how to handle questions about cheating often depends on both personal attitudes and school policies (and sometimes national policies).

In short, I think it is useful to think in these terms when it comes to ChatGPT and cheating.

* Can the incentives for students to cheat be reduced? In many cases, this means assignments _not_ being used as grading material.
* Can graded assignments be carried out in a supervised manner? This can involve written exams with pen and paper, or a computer without an internet connection, but also, for example, giving questions orally to a few students at a time.
* Can assignments be designed so that ChatGPT is a tool that is allowed to use? It is difficult to encourage students under 18 to use ChatGPT, due to the terms of service, but if the goal of an assignment is an oral presentation, a product pitch, or an actual solution to a problem, it may not be wrong for students to seek help from various sources along the way.
* How can you following up suspected cheating?

Some argue that the similar ways of cheating has existed for a long time, and that it has been exploited regularly by a small but dedicated or privileged group of students. ChatGPT contributes to providing more opportunities to cheat, which means that the problem must be taken more seriously – for everyone.

[1]:	https://platform.openai.com/ai-text-classifier "AI Text Classifier"